## Controller arguments ##

A controller method which takes no arguments, for instance `controller.Main.index()`, is accessed via a simple URL - in this case, "`http://localhost:8080/Main/index`". If a controller method takes one or more arguments, however, it will accept URL parameters corresponding to those arguments, either as part of the URL itself (e.g. "`http://localhost:8080/Post/view?id=5`") or in the body of the request (as with a request generated by submitting an HTML form). The method will be called with the values provided by the request. If a parameter is not included in the request, `null` will be passed in (or `false` for boolean parameters).

## Simple parameters ##

If the method parameter's type is:

  * boolean
  * int/long/float/double
  * String
  * java.util.Date

or any other type to which Gosu can coerce a String, it will be set directly using the value in the request. So given the following controller method signature:

```
controller.Main.index(b : boolean, i : int, s : String, d : Date)
```

the following URL:

```
http://localhost:8080/Main/index?b=true&i=5&s=Hello&d=07-11-1980
```

will call

```
controller.Main.index(true, 5, "Hello", new java.util.Date("07-11-1980")).
```

If a parameter is of some other type, Ronin will attempt to find a static method on that type called `fromID` which takes a single parameter and returns an instance of the desired type. (In this documentation we will refer to such types as **entity** types, though they can be any Gosu type.) If it finds such a method, it will call it, passing in the value from the request, and assign the result to the controller method's parameter.

For instance, given the following class:

```
class Person {

  static function fromID(id : long) : Person {
    return fetchPersonFromDb(id)
  }
...
}
```

and the following controller method on `controller.Main`:

```
static function viewPerson(p : Person) {
  ...
}
```

the URL

```
http://localhost:8080/Main/viewPerson?id=5
```

will call

```
controller.Main.viewPerson(Person.fromId(5))
```

Don't forget that you can use a Gosu enhancement to add `fromID()` to an existing type, such as a Hibernate class, thus turning it into a valid Ronin entity type. You could even enhance a single interface implemented by all of your entity types, though be careful to ensure that `fromID()` always returns the concrete type, not the interface type (most likely through the use of a type parameter on the enhancement). Consult the Gosu documentation for further details on enhancements.

## Complex parameters ##

Parameters of a non-primitive type and array parameters support a more advanced syntax. Individual properties of a non-primitive parameter can be set from URL parameters using a dot-path syntax. For instance, given the following method signature:

```
static function updatePerson(p : Person)
```

where Person is a Gosu class defining the following property:

```
var _name : String as Name
```

the URL "`http://localhost:8080/Main/updatePerson?p=0&p.Name=Bob`" will call `Person.fromID(0)`, then set the `Name` property on that instance of `Person` to "Bob".

If a property is specified in the URL, but no ID is given for the instance - e.g. "`http://localhost:8080/Main/updatePerson?p.Name=Bob`" - a new `Person` will be instantiated, and its `Name` set to "Bob". (This assumes that `Person` defines a constructor with no arguments.)

For array parameters, an array is created automatically. Elements in the array are specified in the URL using standard array notation, e.g. "`names[0]=Bob&names[1]=Fred`". If the parameter is an array of entity types, each value specified in this way is passed to `fromID()` to retrieve the appropriate element.

Complex parameters make it very easy to create an HTML form for creating or updating an entity. The controller method to which the form points need only take a single parameter, the entity, and the name of each input in the form is a dot path for the property it edits (e.g. "`p.Name`", or "`p.PhoneNumber`").

Next we'll see how [views](Views.md) work.